---
title: "Important landmarks in the area"
---
The Bhadra-Teen Darwaza market is spread out across an area marked by two medieval historic structures on each end, namely the Bhadra fort and the Teen Darwaza. On account of these structures, the area was declared a heritage site by UNESCO in 2017. Lying at the heart of the "old city", it is India's first "World Heritage City". During the Mughal period, the area was known as the Maidan-e-Shahi, the royal public square where parades and festivals were once held. Even then, the presence of local vendors and markets was remarked upon by Johann Albrecht de Mandelso, a seventeenth-century traveller. In his *Travels in Western India* Mandelslo describes it as "the king's market". Besides the Maidan-e-Shahi he describes "four Bazaars or public places where are sold all kinds of merchandise" (p.22). It is noteable that public space (maidan) and bazaar is used interchangeably by Mandelslo, indicating the centrality of commerce as part of a larger exchange of bodies, sensory experiences, and cultures that marks the urban 'public' sphere.
Apart from the Bhadra fort and the Teen Darwaza the area is dotted with medieval, modern and modern-masquerading-as-ageold landmarks. Today the the Bhadra fort is flanked by the Bhadrakali (red) and Baucharma temple (blue). Many vendors place their carts and stalls outside the perimeter of these temples, in the hopes of attracting temple-goers. The Bhadra vendors used to sell their goods within the premises of the medieval fort. It was a much smaller, contained market. One vendor whose family has worked in the area for the last fifty years and sells women’s cosmetics nearby reminisces, “We lived and worked here, within the fort premises. At lunch time, all of us, Hindu and Muslim would unpack our tiffin-boxes and eat together.” Since then, the market has expanded considerably. This is in part a product of increasing purchasing power, the growth of an urban lower-middle class, and the expansion of temples in the wake of contemporary politico-cultural currents in the city. 
While most remember a more modest version of the Bhadrakali temple, nobody quite remembers when the Bahucharma temple came up. All places of worship, but particularly Hindu temples in a post-Ramjanmabhoomi India have a way of acquiring timelessness. “I think this was always there. I don’t remember but it’s been here for a long time.” One hears a variation of this often. The Bhadrakali mandir is said to have been built in the eighteenth century during Maratha rule. To most, however, it is a *prāchīn* or ancient temple that has existed since time immemorial, as. Regardless of what came first or who has a legitimate claim over the space, this coexistence is strange and fascinating. Heritage conservation projects emphasize the importance of cordoning off the medieval fort to protect it from the hustle bustle of urban life.  In reality, the fort sits cheek-by-jowl with other structures, both old and new, in such close proximity that they appear to be springing from one another. How does one reconcile this with claims of preservation and heritage conservation? The co-existence of informal labour and a heritage site poses a problem not because of the threat of encroachment, but because it is an eye-sore. It is a reminder of the histories of labour migration and urban poverty in modern India, when we’d much rather be marveling at an iconic structure of Sultanate splendour.
Facing the Bhadra fort on the far-left is a dicrepit but still formidable structure which was once the palace of Azam Khan built by a Mughal governor in 1637. Today it is a dusty old government book depot where all manner of obscure government gazettes are sold. Prior, to its current avatar as a run-down *sarkari* or bureaucratic office, it once served as a colonial jail and a hospital. After the fall of the Mughals, it would seem, the building fell prey to the iron cage of modern bureacracy and governmentality. Most of the vendors on this side of the market sell clothes, footwear and faux-leather bags. 
On the other end, marked in pink is the Gujarati Vernacular Society, set up by a colonial official in collaboration with local intelligentsia and industrialist funding in 1848. Today it seems to be more or less moribund, but outside its precincts are "Marwari" (see story 3) vendors who sell an assortment of watches and clocks sourced from nearby wholesale markets. 
In the middle of the "Bhadra-side" of the market is a garden with a statue of a prominent moutachioed man, perched on a chair, surveying the surroundings. Everyone refers to it as "The Baronet's Statue", marked in purple on the map. He is Sir Chinubhai Madhavlal, a textile mill-owner and philanthropist. The statue is tied to the market’s origin story as well as the city’s economic and labour history.  “Ahmedabad is a city of mills, " an elderly vendor tells me. “It had 101 mills. In the 1980s, when these mills closed down, there was a lot of unemployment. How else should people make a living? So they picked up whatever they could get hold of and started selling them here, by the side of the road or on push-carts.” Despite the shifting trajectories of labour in the city and the expulsion of the labour-force into informality and precarity, the baronet’s statue overlooks the market--the old boss still looms large.
As one walks further down, past the Baronet, one approaches the "Teen Darwaza-side" of the market. This half of the market mostly includes Muslim vendors who sell cosmetics, women's jewellery, festive clothes and accessories. Before arriving at Teen Darwaza, one notices a pristine looking masjid which is surrounded by restaurants and eateries. This is Alif Masjid (marked on the map in black) and this is where I learned about the famous Kalimi family and the book depot (marked in yellow) which is Story No. 5 on this walking tour. Teen Darwaza is crowded and significantly more chaotic since eviction drives have not begun on this end of the market. Unlike the Bhadra fort which is cordoned off from the rest of the space thanks to the new plaza (see Story 2), the Teen Darwaza stands right in the middle of all madness. There is a fish market nearby and though the smell on a hot day is nauseating, it seems as if no one in the market- neither the shoppers nor the tenacious vendors seem perturbed. In the middle of all this, one of the vendors will likely direct you to *Lakshmi no divo* or Lakshmi's lamp (marked in orange). Legend has it that this lamp has been burning in one of the alcoves of the Teen Darwaza for the last 600 years. It was a Muslim family that decided to place this earthen lamp, and as its custodians, generations have ensured it stays burning. What has Goddess Lakshmi got to do with this place you ask? And what is her "Muslim connection"? For this we need to walk all the way in the opposite direction, towards the Bhadra fort once again. 
Facing the fort, take the exit on the left towards the main road, known as the apna bazaar exit. Just before the main road, one has to make their way through various carts selling children's clothes, underwear and lingerie, candy, toys and lots of imitation jewellery. There is a small shrine with a roof made of corrugated iron with green pain over it. This is the Lakshmi shrine, marked on the map in grey. Click on Story 3 to learn more about what links Lakshmi, a sufi shrine, an ever-burning lamp and the market as part of a larger, shared history. 
The Bhadra-Teen Darwaza market intricately woven into the historical, sacral and imagined geography of the area. This is why the vendors argue that the market, much like the historic structures that urban planners and conservationists are so desperate to protect, is just as integral to the city's history and urban identity. We are *gareebon nu Big Bazaar* a vendor tells me, clearly pleased with his neologism. He means to say that the poor and working class don't have malls and retail-chains like Big Bazaar where they can shop. The bazaars and the surrounding sites are places where the working poor can shop, sell, eat and cohabit. 

